---
lab:
  topic: Basic
  title: Agile Planning and Management using GitHub
  description: Learn how to create a GitHub repo, project, and project board, and manage items on the project board.
  duration: 40 minutes
  level: 200
  islab: true
  primarytopics:
    - GitHub
---

# Agile Planning and Management using GitHub

In this lab, you will learn how to use GitHub for Agile planning and management. You will create a GitHub repository, set up a project, and manage items on the project board. This lab is designed to help you understand how to effectively plan and track work in an Agile environment using GitHub.

Each task in this lab builds on the previous one, so it's important to complete them in order.

You will learn how to:

- Create a GitHub repo, project, and project board
- Create and manage project board items

This lab takes approximately **40** minutes to complete.

## Before you start

To complete the lab, you need:

- A GitHub user account. If you don't have one, you can [create a new account](https://github.com/join). If you need instructions on how to create a GitHub account, refer to the article [Creating an account on GitHub](https://docs.github.com/get-started/quickstart/creating-an-account-on-github).

## Create a GitHub repo, project, and project board

In this exercise, you'll create a GitHub repo, project, and project board.

> **Note:** As per GitHub documentation, Projects offer _an adaptable, flexible tool for planning and tracking work on GitHub_. Projects provide access to _boards_, which serve the role of _Kanban_ boards. Kanban is a common and widely used framework in an Agile environment to represent the state of the project's work.

The exercise consists of the following tasks:

- Create a GitHub repo
- Create GitHub milestones and issues
- Create a GitHub project
- Create a GitHub project board

### Create a GitHub repo

1. Start a web browser and navigate to the [GitHub](https://github.com) home page.
1. When prompted to authenticate, sign in by using your GitHub user account.
1. On the GitHub main page, select the **Repositories** tab and then select **New**.
1. On the **Create a new repository** page, do the following actions:

   - In the **Owner** drop-down list, select your GitHub user account name.
   - In the **Repository name** text box, enter **`DevOpsCoreIntroRepo`**.
   - Change the visibility of the repo to **Private**.
   - Enable the **Add a README file** checkbox.
   - In the **Add .gitignore** drop-down list, select **Visual Studio**.

   > **Note:** To learn more about .gitignore, refer to [Ignoring files](https://docs.github.com/get-started/getting-started-with-git/ignoring-files).

   - In the **Choose a license** drop-down list, select **MIT license**.

   > **Note:** To learn more about license selections, refer to [Licensing a repository](https://docs.github.com/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/licensing-a-repository).

1. Select **Create repository**.

### Create GitHub milestones and issues

1. On the **DevOpsCoreIntroRepo** page, select the **Issues** tab.

   > **Note:** You will create a milestone and an issue associated with the newly created repo that you will subsequently use when working with the project board.

1. On the **Issues** page, to the left of the **New issue** button, select **Milestones**.
1. On the **Milestones** page, select **Create a milestone**.
1. On the **Create milestone** page, do the following actions:

   - In the **Title** text box, enter **`alpha release`**.
   - In the **Due date (optional)** text box, enter the date one week ahead from the current date.
   - In the **Description** text box, enter **`Completion of the alpha release`**.

1. Select **Create milestone**.
1. Repeat the last three steps to create an **beta release** milestone with the due date two weeks ahead of the current date. In the **Description** text box, enter **`Completion of the beta release`**.
1. Navigate back to the **Issues** page and select **New issue**.
1. In the **Add a title** text box, enter **`Repo README page is empty`**.
1. In the **Add a description** text box, enter **`Brevity might be a virtue, but this README page can really use some text`**.
1. Select the gear icon next to the **Milestone** entry and, in the drop-down list, select **alpha release**.
1. Select the gear icon next to the **Labels** entry and, in the drop-down list, select **bug**.
1. Select **Create**. Note that the issue has been automatically assigned **#1**.

### Create a GitHub project

1. On the repository page, look for the **Projects** tab and select it.
1. Select **New project**.
1. In the **Select a template** pane, select **Team planning**, and then select **Create project**.

   > **Note:** Alternatively, you could start from scratch and display the project in the table, board, or roadmap format.

1. On the new project page, select the autogenerated project name. This will automatically display the **Project settings** page.
1. In the **Project name** text box, enter **`DevOps Core Intro Project`**.
1. In the **Short description** text box, enter **`Introduction to GitHub Projects`** and select **Save changes**.
1. In the **README** section, enter the following text

   > **Note:** The **README** section includes a simplified Markdown editor, assisting you with creating visually appealing README page for the project. You could use the toolbar icons to format the text and use the **Preview** tab to review the resulting changes. Copy and paste the following text into the README editor section:

   ```text
   ### Welcome to DevOps Core Intro Project ###

   **Projects are a customizable, flexible tool for planning and tracking your work.**

   To find out more, refer to GitHub documentation [about Projects](https://docs.github.com/issues/planning-and-tracking-with-projects/learning-about-projects/about-projects).
   ```

1. Select **Preview** to review the resulting page.
1. Select **Save changes**.
1. Scroll down to the **Danger zone** and **note** the option allowing you to switch the visibility of the project between **Private** and **Public**, close the project, and delete it.

   > **Note:** Do not close or delete the project at this point. Only note the options available to you.

1. Scroll up to the top of the page and note that you have the options to **Manage access** to the project and create custom fields in the project interface.
1. Select the left facing arrow in the **<- Settings** label to exit the **Settings** page.

### Create a GitHub project board

1. On the **DevOps Core Intro Project** page, select the **Board** tab near the current selected **Backlog** tab.

   > **Note:** You can use different options to easily switch between the table, board, and roadmap views.

1. Review the resulting page that consists of three predefined columns labeled:

   - **Todo** - including items which haven't been started
   - **In Progress** - including items being actively worked on
   - **Done** - including items that have been completed

   > **Note:** This layout represents a very basic Kanban board. Within each column, you can add individual items. You can also add extra columns.

1. To add an extra column, select the **+** icon to the right of the **Done** column and then select **+ New Column**.
1. In the **New option** window, in the **Label text** text box, enter **`Review In Progress`** and select a color you want to assign to the column. In the **Description** text box, enter **`This item is being reviewed`**, and then select **Save**.
1. Select the small circle next to the **Review in Progress** label of the newly added column and use it to drag it between the **In Progress** and **Done** column.

## Create and manage project board items

In this exercise, you'll create and manage project board items

> **Note:** There are two basic ways of adding items to a project board. You can create an item draft or add an item representing an existing issue in a GitHub repository.

The exercise consists of the following tasks:

- Add a draft item
- Add an item based on an issue
- Review automation settings

### Add a draft item

1. On the **DevOps Core Intro Project** page, in the **Todo** column, select **+ Add item**.

   > **Note:** In the automatically displayed text box, you can either start typing to create a draft or type **#** to reference an existing issue in any of your GitHub repositories. We will start with the first of these two techniques.

1. In the text box, enter **`Missing Wiki`** and then press **Ctrl + Enter** on the keyboard. This will add a new draft item to the **Todo** column.
1. In the newly added draft item, select the ellipsis symbol and, in the drop-down menu, select **Convert to issue**.
1. In the **Select an item** drop-down list, select **DevOpsCoreIntroRepo** to add the item to the repo you created in the previous exercise. Note that the issue has been automatically labeled with **#2**.
1. Select the **Missing Wiki** issue.
1. In the **Missing Wiki #2** pane, note that you have another configuration settings available at this point, including labels and milestones.
1. Select **Labels** and, in the **Select items** drop-down list, select **enhancement**.
1. Select **Milestone** and, in the **Select an item** drop-down list, select **alpha release**.
1. Close the **Missing Wiki #2** pane.

   > **Note:** Now you will add another draft item and convert it into an issue.

1. On the **DevOps Core Intro Project** page, in the **Todo** column, select **+ Add item**.
1. In the text box, enter **`Additional collaborators needed`** and then press **CTRL + Enter** on the keyboard. This will add a new draft item to the **Todo** column.
1. In the newly added draft item, select the ellipsis symbol and, in the drop-down menu, select **Convert to issue** and select **DevOpsCoreIntroRepo** to add the item to the repo.

### Navigate Project items configuration

1. Select **Repo README page is empty** to display the corresponding pane.
1. In the **Repo README page is empty** pane, in the Assignees section, select **Add assignees...**, in the **Select items** drop down list, select your GitHub user name, and close the **Repo README page is empty** pane.
1. Drag the **Repo README page is empty** item from the **Todo** column and drop it in the **In Progress** column.

### Review automation settings

1. In the **DevOps Core Intro Project** page, directly under the avatar icon, near the ellipsis icon select **Workflows**.
1. On the **Workflows** page, in the menu on the left side, review the list of default workflows. '

   > **Note:** By default, the **Item closed** and **Pull request merged** workflows are enabled.

1. Select **Item closed** and review the workflow. The workflow automatically sets the status of an issue to **Done**, whenever that item is closed.
1. Select the avatar icon at the upper right corner of the page and, in the drop-down menu, select **Repositories**.
1. In the list of repositories, select **DevOpsCoreIntroRepo**.
1. In the **README** section, select the pencil icon to open the file in the edit mode.
1. Replace the existing content with the following text:

   ```text
   ### Welcome to DevOps Core Intro Project Repository ###

   **Projects are a customizable, flexible tool for planning and tracking your work.**

   To find out more, refer to GitHub documentation [about Projects](https://docs.github.com/issues/planning-and-tracking-with-projects/learning-about-projects/about-projects).
   ```

1. Select **Commit changes**.
1. In the **Commit changes** window, accept the default settings and select **Commit changes** again.
1. Select the **Issues** tab.
1. Select **Repo README page is empty**.
1. On the **Repo README page is empty #1** page, select **Close issue**.
1. Note that closing the item resulted in the following actions:

   - The status of the item was automatically changed to **Done**, as indicated by an extra comment stating that **github-project-automation** bot moved the item from **In Progress** to **Done** in **DevOps Core Intro Project**.
   - **alpha release** milestone has been marked as 50% complete, as indicated by the green horizontal bar in the **Milestone** section of the page.

   > **Note:** In case you don't see the changes, refresh the page.

1. To verify this, navigate back to the board view of **DevOps Core Intro Project** and note that the **Repo README page is empty** item appears in the **Done** column.

## Clean up resources

You don't need to clean up any resources for this exercise, as the GitHub repo and project will remain available for you to use as a reference and portfolio item.

If you want to delete the repo, you can do so by following this documentation: [Deleting a repository](https://docs.github.com/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/deleting-a-repository).
